okay I'm unmuted now yeah hello everyone
may I have your attention
please thank you so I am humbled and
Beyond excited to introduce our highly
anticipated keynote speaker for this
Symposium Dr Michael Len Dr Len received
a PhD at Harvard University and did his
postdoc training at Harvard Medical
School he holds the vavar bush chair and
directs the Allen Discovery Center at Tu
working to crack the morphogenetic code
for applications in regenerative
medicine and basil cognition recent work
of his includes the creation of
bioinformatics and machine learning
tools for discovery of models and
interventions in Cancer birth defects
and organ
regeneration now without further Ado
please welcome Dr Len for his talk
biophysical and computational approaches
to study decision making and basal
cognition in cells tissues and synthetic
living
machines
thank you very much uh thank you for the
kind introduction and the opportunity to
share uh some ideas with you um one of
the things that I would like to
emphasize today is that there's a really
interesting relationship between uh Ai
and um and biomedicine because in order
to have truly transformative
regenerative medicine we are going to
have to understand the natural
intelligence of the body so there's the
sort of interplay between natural and
artificial int intelligence and if
anyone uh is interested in following up
uh you can find all of the primary
papers and you can find me at these um
two websites so one of the things that
is commonly known is that living living
systems are multiscale in other words we
have uh groups of animals function in in
collectives and swarms and societies
they are made of individual organisms
which are made of organs and tissues and
uh individual subcellular components and
genetic and networks and protein
pathways underneath that but what's less
commonly realized is that this is not
only structural but actually uh
functional that is uh every level of a
living system solves problems and exerts
a kind of intelligence in some
particular problem space and in fact all
intelligences our Collective
intelligences we of course are bags of
cells really and it's very important to
understand how this kind of multiscale
Competency architecture is uh can be
managed in uh in generative medicine in
synthetic
bioengineering and so on because because
there really are computational layers uh
all the way all the way through so the
way I see it and and what we do in in my
Center is to uh bounce back and forth
between machine learning and biology
first of all to use machine learning to
try to understand and control the the
biological endpoints for example for
medicine and uh conversely to use what
we learned from the biology to create
novel kinds of AI architectures that are
based on much more fundamental and not
necessarily neural principles so the
main um points that I'm going to uh try
to uh give you today are these that uh
first I'm going to uh spend some time
talking about the biology actually to
try to uh paint in a different light
what it is that we need to understand
and these are very significant knowledge
gaps about something that's important
called anatomical homeostasis and um try
to convince you that actually biology
and and biom medicine is at a much um
earlier stage than than one would think
based simply on the progress in genetics
and and stem cell biology I'm going to
uh claim that fundamental advances and
new medicine is uh only going to appear
if we understand the decision- making by
cells and tissues not only mechanisms
but actually the algorithms of decision-
making and I'm going to show you that a
key medium for that kind of computation
is non-neural bioelectricity this is uh
this is uh it's it's it's basically a
new kind of epigenetics but but it's
it's a very important software layer of
physiology that sits between the genome
and the and the body and uh we need to
understand this and uh we are working to
crack the bioelectric code which will
enable a huge class of
electrocutica in heart defects
regenerative medicine cancer and
synthetic bi engineering so basically uh
the whole the whole talk boiled down to
two sentences is this I'm going to show
you that like the brain your body
tissues form electrical networks and
these networks make decisions about
Dynamic anatomy and uh new Tools in in
Ai and machine learning are helping
helping us to Target the system for some
really amazing control that enable us
enables us to uh to reap some some very
serious benefits that are have
advantages over competing competing
Technologies so I show you uh this um
this five-legged frog at the beginning
just to say that I'm going to show you
all kinds of weird creatures today these
are not Photoshop these are these are
real living organisms that are uh alive
and well in our lab that serve as as
tests of of the um the various theories
that we develop okay so let's talk about
the fundamental knowledge Gap what is it
really that we want to do in biology and
Medicine consider what the endgame might
be of of all of our activities so at
some point some someday in the future
you should be able to sit down at a
computer and draw right the uh
anatomical layout of the animal or plant
that you want so to really specify the
structure the large scale structure of
what you want to have and not not not at
the genetic or or or um biochemical
level but actually simply draw the thing
you care about which is which is uh the
shape of an organ or or or an appendage
or whatever it is that we need for
medicine uh whether for transplantation
or directly in the patient you should
just be able to drw and if we knew what
we were doing we would have a piece of
software which I call an anatomical
compiler which would take that
description and convert it into a set of
stimuli that would have to be given to
cells to build exactly that shape so
here I've drawn a three diim a
three-headed uh PL are and a
three-headed flatworm in here is the
three-headed flatworm that would arise
if this thing was able to tell me what
to do to all of the cells what what
stimuli to give all the cells to get
them to build this now why is this
important well if we had something like
this basically all of the problems of
medicine except for infectious disease
would disappear so if we knew how to
tell groups of cells what it is that
they should be building we would be able
to resolve birth defects traumatic
injury uh cancer aging degenerative
disease
all of these fundamental problems hang
on one basic thing which is that we
really need to be able to convince
groups of cells to build whatever we
want them to build healthy new um
healthy new organs now um so let's let's
ask this question how do our collectives
of s know what to build so this is uh
this is a group of embryonic blastam Mir
shortly after fertilization and this is
the cross-section through a human torso
now look at this incredibly complex
order right everything is in exactly the
right position orientation the right
shape the right size next to the right
neighbors uh it's it's an incredible
amount of order and so we ask how does
this group of cells build exactly this
every single time and so so where is
this information of course immediately
we're tempted to say DNA you know it's
in the genome but of course we can read
genomes now and we know now that it is
in fact not in the genome there's
nothing in the genome that talks
directly about any of this the genome
refers to proteins so it it specifies
the micr level Hardware that every cell
gets to have doesn't say anything
directly about the shape the size the
symmetry of the body so we have this
this important question if we wanted to
repair a piece that was missing or
damaged we wanted the cells to uh to to
rebuild it what would we have to do to
these cells to get them to do it again
and as Engineers we would like to know
how far can we push this in other words
could we get the same cells to build
something completely different so let's
think about what individual cells can do
this is a single cell this is a creature
called a lacr areia um you will notice
that uh it has no brain it has no
nervous system it has no stem cells no
cellto cell communication it is
incredibly competent in its own local
single cell level goals so it handles
all of its metabolic needs all of its
transcriptional needs its um morpha
genetic needs behavioral so you know
here you can see it hunting for things
in its environment of food uh how you
know how how how can it do this without
a brain so that's the topic of of a
field an emerging field called basil
cognition
but what's what's interesting for us now
is that these kinds of creatures these
single cells that have local goals that
they're very good at at pursuing can
actually work together to for uh to
pursue much bigger goals and I'm going
to show you that momentarily but here's
the basic framework we all start life as
this single cell this fertilized egg and
this is going to self assemble into one
of these remarkably complex morphologies
we know right away that uh stem cell
biology is not sufficient this is a
Teratoma this is a tumor it may have
skin and hair and teeth and Bone and so
the stem cell part has gone fine the
stem cells have made their various
mature uh tissue derivatives but what's
missing of course is three-dimensional
organization so not only do you need to
have the building blocks of the body but
they actually need to know where to go
relative to each other so in in
fundamental developmental biology the
Paradigm looks something like this it's
very much based on uh emergence and a
kind of feed forward open loop system
where you have Gene regulatory networks
so genes turn each other on and off some
of these genes make proteins that do
things they diffuse or they're sticky or
they exert force and then all of this
happens in parallel and and then this
this magical process of emergence where
lots of simple things happening
repeatedly in parallel give rise to a
complex outcome such as this beautiful
salamander of course all of that does
happen so this is this is true but it's
very limiting because it has a it has a
fundamental uh difficulty which is if
you wanted to make changes here let's
say that I wanted this salamander to
have three-fold Sy instead of bilateral
symmetry or I wanted more legs or I
wanted two tails or something uh this
makes it look like all of the changes
have to happen down here you have to
make the changes at the genetic level
that will then propagate and of course
reversing this is a is a intractable
inverse problem we have no idea in
general what changes to make down here
to give us um the desire changes at the
system level right so so reversing this
kind of recursive massively parallel
system is is almost
impossible now uh there there are other
difficulties which are that uh we have
really some some basic areas of of
ignorance about genomes and Anatomy so
I'm going to introduce you today to
another creature called a planarian and
uh plenaria and and so so the thing
about plenaria is as I'll mentioned in a
minute plenaria regenerate so if you cut
off their heads and tails plenaria
regenerate their heads and tails and
they have a set of a set of stem cells
called neoblasts that produce all of the
new material so here's a species of
plaria with a flathead here's a species
with a round head and uh I can do a
thought experiment I can say okay I'm
going to take uh half of these stem
cells from this
flatheadedgorilla one of the shapes
might be dominant to the other it might
be an in between shape or maybe no it
will never stop regenerating because
neither set of cells is ever happy about
the current state of the shape of the
head so the interesting thing is that
despite all the papers in in nature and
science about the molecular biology of
stem cells in this model system we have
not a single model that will give a
prediction on this okay because while we
understand the uh pretty well the
individual molecular events that guide
individual cell decisions we we are have
very poor understanding of what guides
large scale anatomical level decisions
and so how this Collective is going to
decide what head shape it's going to
make we actually have no models that
that make predictions about that at all
so uh overall where things stand are
that we're very good at manipulating uh
the the hardware so so cells and uh and
individual Pathways proteins genes but
we're really a long way from Form and
Function and so control of Form and
Function and so what I've argued before
is that basically if we kind of think
about um The Journey that computer
science took that uh went from from this
this is what programming looked like in
the 40s and 50s where you literally had
to rewire the system physically in order
to get it to do something different and
now of course why don't we do this right
when you when you want to switch from
from Photoshop to Microsoft Word on your
laptop why do you not get out your
soldering iron and start soldering away
because we've realized that if the
hardware is good enough then you can
control it by experiences by stimuli
right by by reprogramming not by editing
the hardware and yet all the biology and
biom medicine is down here right now all
of the most exciting advances are all
about you know crisper genome editing um
uh changing promoters and protein
engineering it's at the micr level
Hardware so this whole journey is open
to us in biology we are uh we are just
at the beginning of this and I'm going
to show you uh some of the ways in which
the biological Hardware is absolutely
good enough it's it's in fact amazing um
one of the interesting things about
uh about morphogenesis is that it is
reliable but it's actually uh not
hardwired it's quite flexible so here is
this this Axel lottle it's a Mexican
salamander these guys throughout their
lifespan regenerate their limbs their
eyes their jaws their spinal cords
portions of the brain and heart so so um
you know amazing everybody wants to be
like like an aelole of course all the
regenerative medicine is thinking about
how to crank this this ability up in
humans but but the most amazing thing
about it is that if you for example
amputate a limb here in fact you can
amputate it anywhere you like it will
grow very rapidly it will uh make
exactly what's missing and then it stops
that's the most amazing part how does it
know when to stop well it stops when a
correct salamander arm has been produced
and if it's cut here it will grow this
much if it's cut here it will only grow
this much so it's context sensitive it
can deal with novelty but it's reliable
it can get to the same goal from
different starting positions that by the
way is William James is defin of
intelligence is a system that can get to
the same uh goal through different
means um and uh the challenge is to ask
how this collection Collective of cells
can tell what a proper salamander arm
looks like here are the plenaria I told
you about so here are these um these
these flatworms they have all kinds of
internal organs they have a true brain
uh lots of the same neurotransmitters
that you and I have and if you cut them
into pieces and the record is something
like 275 pieces uh each piece becomes a
tiny little worm it grows exactly what's
missing no more no less and becomes a
tiny little worm in fact um they're so
good at regenerating they are Immortal
so don't let anybody tell you that aging
is some sort of consequence of um of
entropy or or thermodynamics that it's
you know we have to get old and die
that's actually not true these plenaria
don't have a lifespan limit they live
forever um if and there's no such thing
as an old planarian they simply keep
regenerating whatever cells sesse and
die now uh regeneration is not just for
so-called lower animals so so the human
uh the human liver um the human liver
can regenerate and uh the uh the deer
which are a large adult mammal can uh
regrow their antlers every year they
grow these antlers up to a centimeter
and a half of new bone per day that they
grow okay this is bone vasculature
innervation um skin and then human
children uh below a certain age can also
regenerate their fingertips so so we
also have some of this regenerative
ability of course our body built all of
these organs during embryonic
development the question is how do we
Kickstart them and how do we understand
how the cells make decisions are they
going to scar are they going to build an
organ which organ are they going to
build and I want to um kind of cement
this idea of of of of of intelligence
and go Direct in this in the following
with the follow because it's going to be
very important momentarily with with
this example this is something we
discovered a few years ago uh this is a
tadpole of the Frog so here are the two
eyes nostrils brain and uh gut um these
tpes in order to become a frog they have
to rearrange their face so the Jaws have
to move forward the eyes have to move
everything kind of has to has to remodel
and it was thought that uh well every
TPO looks the same and every frog looks
the same so that all you would have to
do is somehow encode a a distance and a
direction for every piece of the head to
move and and if everybody does that then
you'll get from a normal frog to a from
normal Tull to a normal frog well we
decided to test that and we made these
so-called Picasso tadpoles here's an
example everything's in the wrong place
the eyes on top of the head the Jaws are
off to the side everything is just
completely scrambled and what we found
is that these animals become largely
perfectly normal frogs because all of
these pieces even though they start off
in the wrong place um relative to the
wrong thing they all will move in novel
paths okay not not the paths that they
normally do in in embryonic development
they move through normal um through
novel paths sometimes actually they go
too far and they have to they have to
track back a little bit but they keep
doing it until they end up in this uh in
this correct configuration through this
through this interesting algorithm that
we were able to um to to to infer so the
amazing thing here is that genetics
doesn't specify uh a hardwired set of
movements what it specifies is a machine
that can uh basically perform an error
minimization task you can think of it as
some sort of um uh means ends analysis
where basically it just reduces the
progressively reduces the error compared
to uh the the correct pattern which
again brings us to the this notion of
what a correct pattern is so um so in my
group what we focus on is is uh on top
of this feedforward sort of emergent
picture we put these these feedback
loops that uh talk about what happens
when the system is deviated from the
correct state so now this could be
injury it could be uh mutation it could
be teratogens many different things
there are these feedback loops that kick
in both at the level of physics and at
the level of genetics to get you back as
as much as best as it can get get you
back to where it's supposed to be this
is basically homeostasis now on the one
hand this should not be a surprise to
anybody in biology we we know there are
feedback loops of course we know
homeostasis but um but there's a couple
of things that are different here one is
that whereas normal homeostasis
usually um usually is is all about some
sort of scaler you know pH hunger level
something like that uh and uh and and so
it's a single number here what you have
is uh you have the the set point for
this homeostatic process is actually a
fairly complex descriptor it's some sort
of coar grained description of what a
correct anatomical pattern is so you
have to think about how could biology
store something like that uh that's the
first thing and the second thing is that
it suggests an important change of
strategy instead of having to make
changes down here which are very
difficult to know what they should be
for changes out here instead of solving
this inverse problem what we might do is
do the same thing you do with your
thermostat when you change your
thermostat to a different uh setting you
don't rewire the thermostat you don't
change the structure of the thermostat
in fact you may not even know how the
rest of it works you don't need to know
the only thing you need to know is the
fact that it is a homeostatic system and
you need to know how to read and write
the set point information so maybe what
we can do biometic is leave the system
intact it's very good at following uh
different um uh set point information
let's leave that alone let's exploit
that and instead of trying to alter the
Machine by gen editing or or changing
Pathways let's try to rewrite the set
point so here's what we've been trying
to do we've been trying to identify uh
the the mechanisms by which these set
points are stored and learn to read and
write them and I'm going to show you how
that works now in this case the set
point is quite large and one thing I
want to point out is that as you know
during
evolution of course you have these
individual cells that are operating on
very small local single cell set points
then they start to work together and
there's this collective intelligence
that can work towards very large goals
you know this this this massive gold
that's bigger than any individual cell
in fact this is truly a collective
intelligence because during this process
many of the cells actually have to die
the cells in between the fingers have to
die and and so all the cells are kind of
this this this massive Collective that's
working on this giant thing not on their
own individual goals but that process
can break down and we'll talk about this
momentarily this is cancer this is in
fact a gleo gly blastoma cells crawling
around and what happens is that
individual cells can defect from this
process they can disconnect from this
network that binds them towards these
large scale goals and they can start
rolling back to their ancient amoeba
level goals and they treat the rest of
the body it's just external environment
so so the uh the the size of the goals
that sets that cells work on can uh can
grow and shrink during the lifetime of
the animal and there's some uh there's
some very interesting aspects of this so
let's so let's think about this now now
what I want to talk about is exactly how
does this happen how do how do cellular
goals um uh scale up and what can we do
about it and for that we have to
understand bioelectricity and so I'm
going to do is talk to you about some
methods for addressing what I think is
basically the the software of life and
then uh let's talk about um what what
can you do with this I'm going to show
you some examples now we're going to
spend the the next half an hour talking
about bioelectricity and I want to be
clear it's not because I think that
bioelectricity does everything in the
body it's clearly one layer of all kinds
of interesting signaling modalities of
course there's chemical gradients
biophysical pressures tensions
extracellular Matrix all kinds of things
but uh bioelectricity actually is
interesting in a in a very specific way
it's not just another piece of physics
that you need to know to track what
cells are doing it's actually giving us
access to a uh privileged access to a
computational layer a layer where
decisions are being made about what
happens not just not just physics but
actually um
computation now uh we took as our uh in
in in looking at this we took as our
inspiration the one system that is
uncontroversially known to be able to uh
scale up from Individual cells to large
scale goals and that's the brain so in
the brain you have a you have a you have
a collection of individual cells of
neurons and they can keep memories and
they can pursue goals and so on so how
how does the brain do this trick well
there's there's Hardware which is
basically indiv each individual uh cell
has little um proteins in the cell
surface called ion channels they uh they
pass ions such as potassium and sodium
and so on in and out of the cell and as
a result they acquire a voltage gradient
so they acquire a potential a voltage
potential across the meming and they can
communicate that gradient across these
controllable electrical synapses known
as Gap Junctions that's the hardware the
software and you can see it here this is
uh this is Imaging a beautiful Imaging
by this group of a zebra fish brain a
living zebra fish brain thinking about
whatever it is that zebra fish think
about and you can see all of the
electrical activity and it's a primary
commitment of Neuroscience that these
electrical Dynamics are holding the uh
the mental content of this of this
little mind that basically if we were
able to decode what the uh what the
patterns were were were doing we would
know the animals Memories the you know
the animals preferences um and and so on
right so so this is where this is where
all the software of cognition sits now
it turns out that uh the brain did not
invent this this kind of architecture
from scratch it was based on Ancient uh
ancient principles that evolution
discovered way back around the time of
bacterial biofilms and so every cell in
your body does this every cell has ion
channels most cells have have Gap
Junctions to their neighbors and we can
do a very parallel uh kind of effort to
uh uh to to neural decoding in
neuroscience and we can do sematic
decoding we can say I mean here here's a
here's a voltage sensitive fluorescent
die showing you the electrical activity
of an early frog embryo there are no
neurons here there's no brain yet but
already the cells are communicating
electrically about who's going to be
left right you know anterior posterior
and so on and uh you can imagine that if
we uh if we understood how to decode how
to read and write this information we
would have some amazing control over
growth and form and so the first thing I
want to do is um I want to show you um
the uh tools that we use
to uh kind of measure measure first
first to measure and characterize these
things so this is the voltage sensitive
fluorescent die which allows us to see
all of these uh things in uh in in in
real time and then we do a lot of
computational modeling and simulation so
once we know uh what the channels and
pumps are in in each cell we can ask
where do these patterns come from I'm
going to show you a couple of examples
of these patterns so this is one called
uh the electric face so here's a frog
embryo trying to put its uh trying to
put its face together it's in time-lapse
and what you see is this is one frame
from this video uh the the the
depolarized region are are lighter here
and what you can see is that already
before all the genes come on that are um
going to dictate where the eye is formed
where the you know all the other organs
already this tissue has decided where
everything goes here's the here's where
the animal's right eye is going to be
here are the pla codes here's the mouth
this is already and I'm showing you this
as opposed to other patterns because
this is the most the easiest one to
decode I mean it literally looks like a
face right we call this the electric
face it literally looks like that um we
know that this pattern is absolutely
functionally instructive meaning it's
it's required for normal development
because if you interfere with it you
create Picasso tadpoles so you can move
all this stuff around move all the gene
expression and all the anatomy by
changing the electrical pattern so this
is a normal um pre-pattern required and
of course there are human
channelopathies that have cranofacial
defects that uh are uh that that are due
to disruptions in this in this process
now there are also pathological patterns
such as this where we introduce a human
oncogene into the embrio eventually it
makes a tumor eventually the tumor
starts to metastasize but before that
happens you can already see the
bioelectrics uh traces of these cells
disconnecting from their neighbors in
order to become individual uh individual
amibas that are going to metastasize and
and proliferate they have to disconnect
electrically from their neighbors that
were binding them into a collective that
was able to store large scale goals such
as form you know form a form nice chunk
of muscle or or skin or something like
that okay so these are these are the
patterns now we have to be able to uh so
we can read them now we have to be able
to write them so we basically just stole
all the techniques from from
Neuroscience we do exactly the same
thing it's very interesting uh the the
tools cannot tell the difference between
neurons and non-neural cells they work
exactly the same which tells you
something interesting about our our
Notions of of what neurons are and and
how fundamental that distinction is
exactly the same Technologies uh work
here so so I can take a piece of skin or
liver or anything else and I can control
these electrical synapses by opening and
closing them so this is the topology of
the network who talks to whom or I can
directly set their voltage by opening
and closing these channels so I can use
drugs I can mutate the channels I can
use light in terms of optogenetics what
we don't do is any electrical field
application so there are no electrodes
uh there are no electromagnetic fields
or waves nothing like that what we what
we do is use molecular physiology to
Target the very um components that are
used by the by this network to to hold
electrical properties and when you do
this some very interesting thing happens
I'm going to show you some examples one
example is at the Single Cell level is
this I told you that when Electrical uh
connection between cells and their
neighbors are lost this is the first
step towards tumorogenesis and so here
what we do is we inject a red florescent
red labeled enene into uh into this
animal and of course it it makes a tumor
and there's the there's the red you can
see that but here here it is again
blazingly strongly expressed in fact all
over the place here not just here it's
everywhere and there's no tumor and
there's no tumor because we co-injected
another Channel this happens to be a
chloride channel that forces those cells
to be hyperpolarized and to keep
connected electrically connected with
their neighbors so even though the
enogen is is is is cranking the um the
cells are not going to go off in form
tumors because they are electrically
coupled to a network that overrides
their individual cellular goals to to
proliferate dedifferentiate and and so
and metastasize and keeps them harnessed
towards a large scale a large scale goal
now what might what might those large
scale goals be well here's one example
um I told you that in the electric face
we were able to get an idea of what the
patterns are that uh Kickstart the
different types of organs so what we did
was we took an ion Channel RNA and we
injected it in a set of cells that are
going to become gut so here's a side
view of a tle here's the eye here's the
m
um here's the gut and what we did was we
imposed on on a on a region of those
cells the same voltage that uh normally
would be associated with making an eye
in the face and sure enough what they do
is they make an eye okay so what we've
done is we've convinced these sets of
cells that they should become an eye now
the so-called master I Gene the the
transcription Factor pack six doesn't do
this it only works up here in the
anterior neum but but the bi electrics
Works anywhere you can convince any cell
in the body uh to to start making an eye
these eyes have all the right layers
retina optic nerve all of that stuff and
so notice notice a couple of interesting
things one is that uh what we provide is
basically a sub routine call we don't
provide enough information to tell those
cells how to make an eye in fact we have
no idea how to make an eye eyes are very
complex and lots of cell types we
provide a fairly simple bioelectrical
state whose interpretation is build an
eye here and then the cells do the rest
it's basically a subroutine call we've
identified a module that builds eyes and
we've identified how to trigger it where
we want and then and then it takes care
of itself so that's very good for
regenerative medicine you don't have to
micromanage all the
outcomes um there are also uh two layers
of instruction here these this is this
is a a section through a lens that's
sitting out in the flank of a of a tail
somewhere that we've induced the blue
cells are the ones that we actually int
that we actually um modified to induce
this new ION channel it's a pottassium
channel okay these cells start to make
an eye but the whole system really izes
that there's not enough of them to to
make a proper lens and so what they do
is recruit a bunch of their neighbors
these all these Brown cells here they
never got the channel they're completely
wild type native cells so there's two
levels of instruction we instruct these
cells you you need to make an eye they
instruct their neighbors saying come
help us the eye is supposed to be of
this size which again we did not have to
micromanage so that's so that's very
good you can make uh we can make the
same way by in by inducing electrical
States we can induce Autos cysts or uh
inner ear balance or organs um we can
induce ectopic Hearts all right so extra
Hearts we can induce extra forbrain uh
we can induce extra limbs as I showed
you here and we can make fins now that's
a little weird because tpes aren't
supposed to have fins and so we'll get
to that momentarily but you can see that
that that by manipulating the large
scale bioelectrical patterns you don't
just change specific cells or cell
differentiation into different cell
types this is a language at the level of
organs okay and it goes beyond organs it
goes to whole body axis so you can see
here this is a planarian um I take this
middle I take this worm I chop off the
head and the tail and I leave this
middle fragment the middle fragment 100%
of the time will regrow a head here and
it will regrow a tail there how does it
know where it go where everything goes
well if you look there's this
interesting voltage gradient that um uh
says one head one tail okay now what we
can do is we can manipulate the ion
channels in these in these tissues to
say actually I want two heads or I want
no heads okay so you can do that
um we'll get into this uh this shortly
so you can control now now one thing
here is that um these uh these heads are
normal and they belong to this uh to
this normal species but you can go
further than this and you can ask a
species to make heads that belong to a
completely different species so here's
an animal with a triangular head we chop
off the head we prevent the rest of the
body from electrically communicating
amongst the the cells so basically block
the Gap Junctions for about 48 hours
then we withdraw the blocker the cells
settle into a new electrical State and
sometimes they settle into their correct
attractor and you get your normal head
shape but sometimes they get they make
round heads like this s Mediterranean
sometimes they make flatheads like this
pina these animals are about 150 100 to
150 million years of genetic distance
except there's no genetic difference
here there's nothing we didn't do
anything to the Genome of these animals
this is purely uh temporarily
physiologically block them from
communicating with each other and they
found uh states in the attract
landscape of that electrical circuit
that belong to other species okay
without without any genetic change and
in fact not only the head shapes uh
change but the shapes of their brain
changes change the shape of the the the
distribution of number of stem cells
changes you can go even further than
this and you can explore regions of the
morphospace that biology doesn't use at
all and you can make planaria that
aren't even flat so they can be spiky
like this they can be cylindrical like
that they can be kind of a combination
form these cells are perfectly happy to
build up other things if the Electrical
uh pattern of what it is that they're
building is altered now we can use this
for biomedical uh application so so here
we are working on leg
regeneration frogs unlike salamanders do
not regenerate their legs so you
amputate 45 days later there's nothing
you can
um uh you can uh uh you can add
introduce a cocktail the cocktail
triggers a build-a leg here kind of uh
signal immediately medely you see this
Pro regenerative msx1 it starts to come
on and within 45 days L later you've got
some toes you've got a toenail the leg
is touch sensitive and it's motile so
the animal can use it and eventually it
makes a it makes a very nice makes a
very nice leg um the treatment here is
only 24 hours so what we do is we treat
with the Ion channel drugs for about 24
hours and we don't touch it again you
from a 24-hour treatment in adult frogs
these are froglets but we um we we've
shown this in in complete adults in
adult frogs after 24-hour treatment you
get leg regeneration for a year and a
half okay so it really is a very early
trigger where you convince the cells
that instead of scarring they're going
to regrow whatever naturally is supposed
to go there which is a leg and you don't
get tumors you don't get eyes you don't
get tails you get proper frog legs and
uh and and they grow for about a year
and a half without us having to do
anything now you know for bi medicine we
have to we have to remind ourselves that
yes this is not some sort of frog
specific or worm specific technology
we've done these things with human
meenal stem cells with with
cardiomyocytes all the kinds of things
you would expect to do in vitro what
we're doing now is we're trying for limb
regeneration in mammals so the idea
would be can we can we use a bioreactor
a wearable bioreactor produced by our
collaborators in the K lab they make
these bioreactors inside the bioreactor
is a gel with ION channel drug payLo and
uh again only for the first day it's on
and then basically uh it it protects the
the the cells as they make decisions
about what they're going to do and I
have to do a disclosure here because
David and I have started a company
called morical Inc which is which is
dedicated to using these kind of
approaches for regeneration of all kinds
of organs you know appendages and organs
now um I should say that it is uh it is
known at the Single Cell level how
individ how voltage changes talk to the
genome so the transduction Machinery by
which voltage changes and individual
cells control gene expression that's
known we know about at least half a
dozen mechanisms by which this happens
some very common ones like calcium
channels some exotic ones like voltage
sensitive phosphatases so so we know
this we know how the transduction works
at a single cell level and in fact we
know what's Downstream so we've studied
using NextGen sequencing and microarray
we've shown that all your favorite uh
BMP pathway Sonic Hedgehog pathway fgf
um all the wi all of these kinds of
things are Downstream of the bi Electric
decisions that the circuit makes then
you have to implement them by
rearranging morphogens and so on but all
of this is uh even though we know these
molecular details at the Single Cell
level all of this has been uh highly
unsatisfying because that isn't what
we're trying to understand we're not
trying to understand individual cell
decisions we are trying to understand um
large scale uh where large scale shape
comes from and how to control it and so
what we really need to do is this and so
this is what we're working on a kind of
full stack approach a multiscale
approach where we start with
transcriptional circuits that uh that
result in specific channels being
expressed then we model computationally
all the bioelectric Dynamics in the
tissue that result from these channels
operating then we can ask how does this
relate to large scale axial you know
sort of whole body patterning and then
from this we can derive algorithmic
kinds of descriptions of what's going on
that are really suitable for
manipulations you know once you have
this kind of white box model where you
can see what it's measuring what what
decisions it's making what are the
control points you can start to
intervene intervening down here is is is
really really hard and so this is uh
this is a um a simulator called Betsy
that our uh collaborator Alexis pek
wrote that uh lets us take individual
cells in a virtual tissue and model
every cell has these these networks both
both chemical and bi electrical and then
we can ask tissue level questions like
hey when we cut it into pieces How come
every piece rescales the electrical
gradient how does that work and so
here's a you know there's a model that
could explain that and so here's where
the AI comes in there's a couple things
that uh that that that we've done and
and if people are interested here here's
all the software you can you can
download it and described in various
papers and you can play with it uh two
two things that are really important on
the machine learning side one is to help
us um infer models so so knowing the the
pieces that are in there the various
channels and and transcription factors
and everything else what is a what is a
minimal model that explains the
functionality that we see that explains
how it grows how it regenerates what
shape it makes so trying to discover
models and in fact um we've done this so
so so here in um a few years ago we
showed how you can use evolutionary
computation so basically uh just
simulate Evolution over the space of
possible models to try to match uh
functional data of regeneration so
basically we had a system we code it
into it uh every known uh functional
piece of data in the planarian
literature so hundreds and hundreds of
papers not not large data in the sense
of um like genomic sequencing but
actually functional data like we cut it
in a particular way we treated it with
particular drugs and then look it made
you know a head and two tails or
something and so that kind of that kind
of information goes into the database
and then there's a uh there's a there's
an evolutionary computation across a
simulator that tries to identify models
whose behavior in the experiments
matches what the database has in it from
the Publications okay so it tries to
infer act and so this is this is an
amazing um I'm I'm still kind of amazed
about the fact that this actually came
up with a human understandable model of
what's going on in planaria you know
human scientists have been trying to do
this for for probably 120 years uh and
and the system actually guessed a very
nice very nice model of how heads
different from Tails uh and that's the
most creative part of the scientist job
right is is is trying to come up with
these models and then here we have ai
doing that so I thought thought that was
that was pretty cool but we're going to
have to have we're going to have to have
this because
um the amount of information functional
information is is flooding us at a rate
at which no no human scientist can keep
all of these things in their in their
head so so not only do we do this for
inferring uh inferring models the next
step is to infer interventions so now
that you have a decent model you can ask
this question um if I want the system to
do something different how would I
intervene where you know which of these
nodes and and in what way do I need to
intervene and you can look for very rare
kinds of interventions where where most
of them don't do what you want and in
this case we were able to find some nice
trigger points that let us control um
melanoma basically the conversion of
normal melanocytes into melanoma so so
the AI is is important both on the on
the on the model uh inference and on the
intervention inference and um to come
back to the to the bi electrics a little
bit um because because I want to get
back to the to the medical aspects um
one one thing that you hear a lot I
think it's important to understand the
biology in in a new way in order to
enable all these things and and one one
thing I I'd like to talk about is is
this metaphor of the code so you will
often hear that the DNA is the software
of the of the body and that actually the
cells are the hardware that interpret
the software and I think I think that's
um that's okay for certain kinds of
things but I think it's profoundly
incomplete and limiting and I I'll give
you a different metaphor to uh to
consider uh what I actually think is is
more more valuable is the idea that what
the genome actually does is it nails
down the hardware of every cell the
gunome is just a description of what
what proteins including ion channels are
going to be present in the cell but now
once you make um a tissue out of these
cells even though they all have the same
ion channels you basically have made an
excitable medium in which symmetry
breaking and and amplification can take
place and this is this is now a a
simulation a model of that of that
scenario where where all the cells are
proteomically identical they all have
the same channel and yet look at all
this Rich structure at the bioelectrical
level if you've seen touring patterns um
that's kind of a chem the chemical
version of of that same thing same thing
happening in the brain you can have all
kinds of activity without having to uh
wait for new new gene expression to come
on and so basically you can build
circuits that have this interesting
property like a flip-flop where they can
store different electrical patterns in
the same set of cells they without
changing out the cells or without
changing the the proteins in the cells
much like this flip-flop that can store
a zero or a one via the the pattern of
energy flow through the system and just
by taking stock of what the parts are
you can't tell what's in it this is why
bioelectricity work is so hard you can't
kill the cell and then fix it and then
analyze it all all the information is
gone at that point you have to study the
living system and you have to do the
physic profiling it's all in the in the
real-time electrical activity it's not
in the in the proteins so if this is
true uh it makes an interesting
prediction that we should be able to
edit the software while keeping the
hardware constant and I've kind of shown
you all that already in the examples
with the eye and and the heads and all
that but I want to drill down to one
specific example so here's a planarian
head and tail has normal gene expression
so the anterior genes are in the head
not in the tail uh and when I cut it
like this it makes a perfectly normal
one-headed worm as it's supposed to and
it's very reliable now here we have the
same thing one-headed animal uh the
anterior genes are in the front so
that's good I cut that and I get a
two-headed flat worm why why is that
because I just told you that it was
reliable how come the two-headed
flatworm and it's because what we've
done in the meantime is edit the
electrical pattern of this body to say
not one head like here but actually two
and when we do this sure enough it makes
a two-headed worm now here's the most
important part of this
slide this electrical pattern is not a
readout of this animal this electrical
pattern is the readout of this animal in
other words this is not the electrical
pattern isn't what the anatomy is doing
now electrical pattern is a stored
memory in this case a latent memory
because it doesn't do anything until you
injure the the worm it's a latent memory
of what a correct planarian is supposed
to look like which gets consulted after
injury it doesn't do anything until then
and and and the bioelectric pattern does
not have to match the current Anatomy
the currently it's a one-headed animal
and it can have this this you know so so
one a normal body can store at least two
different ideas of what a correct
planarian looks like so I promised you
at the beginning that we were going to
find the set point for anatomical
homeostasis we're going to be able to
read and write the memory of what the
anatomy is supposed to be this is it and
there are many more I'm just showing you
a nice simple example this is we can now
literally see how this tissue is
encoding how many heads it's going to
form if it gets injured and that
information can live in the same in the
same kind of body here now uh one
interesting question you could ask is uh
well what happens if you take one of
these two-headed animals and recut it in
plain water no more manipulations leave
the I Chan alone you just going to recut
it so now the standard Paradigm would
tell you that well you you remove the
primary head you remove this ectopic
secondary head um the all all you've got
left is a nice normal gut fragment we
didn't do any genomic editing so or
mutation so surely all you're going to
get is a normal worm now right in the
absence of this crazy reprogrammed
tissue you're just going to have a
normal worm and that's of
course what um what you would think
except that if you analyze the electric
circuit you see that it actually has two
stable points it has one stable point at
the single head state but it has another
stable point at the double head State
and so when you do this when you
actually cut them they don't go back to
normal they one they continue to re to
regenerate as two-headed animals so this
system again remember nothing has been
changed about the genetic sequence here
and and and and of and we can change it
back to normal we can take the two heads
and and convert them back to normal by
um blocking a particular ion pump for
for a couple of days so so this has all
the properties of memory it's long-term
stable it's rewritable it's got
conditional recall and it has uh you
know two possible outcomes so think
about what this means for for for
biology um the question of how many
heads this thing is going to have is not
something that's nailed down by the DNA
it's not in the genome what the genome
gives you is a machine that reliably
defaults to a pattern memory of one head
but you can rewrite that and not only
does the system keep it once you rewrite
it apparently forever but it will obey
the new pattern until you set it back to
normal so that's very that's very
important that means you have Hardware
that has a default Behavior but you also
have the software lever layer that you
can interact with if you know how to
read and write that information that
does not require you to do any genome
editing and so what we're trying to do
right now is to really understand um uh
really understand how the state space of
these electrical circuits correspond to
the different shapes and uh especially
to merge it with with um paradigms out
of connectionist machine learning where
it's uh very understandable how networks
how electrical networks store patterns
how they store memories and in
particular how they do pattern
completion when part of that information
is gone you know hopfield Nets and other
things will restore it and so there's a
very nice um mer kind of a merging of
dynamical systems and energy
minimization and uh learning and
information and so so I think by biology
has has tons to learn from um from the
kinds of things that uh that that
machine learning has been has been
working on okay so so in the last couple
minutes um I want to uh tell you about
where where I think this is all going
and U and and first I just want to show
you something about the rational design
of so-called
electrocutica frog brain the electrical
pre pattern of a frog brain and you can
see the important thing to see here is
that there's a particular pattern here
that tells the brain exactly how wide it
should be so it sets the size and shape
of the brain out out of this whole you
know out of this whole entire tissue and
it has a very particular bi electrical
pattern and the thing is that this bi
electrical pattern is critical because
if that bi electrical pattern goes wrong
uh and it can be affected by uh nicotine
by alcohol by various teratogens by
mutations all kinds of things if that
pattern goes wrong uh what you get is
birth defects of the brain so so here
are the eyes here's the forbrain here's
the midbrain the hindbrain um you can
have a hindbrain that kind of looks okay
although uh not not not great and then
the midbrain is is just completely
screwed up the forebrain is just gone
the eyes end up connecting directly to
the midbrain it is just terrible so we
asked a simple question if we know what
the correct pattern is and we know that
the pattern has become Incorrect and th
led to this this defective uh the crania
facial structure what would we have to
do to change that so we made a model um
and this is again work with our
collaborator Alexis pyac
uh she and VAV Pai in my group made this
uh made this model of a um of the
electrical circuit of the early brain
and what goes wrong with it and then
they asked the simple question they they
interrogated the model to say okay if uh
if that's what's wrong what channel
would we need to open or close to get
back to the correct State and notice
that what you can't do so so here's this
bell curve pattern is what you want you
can't just raise everybody up to to to
be at this level because those those
that gives you birth brain defects and
you can't drop everybody down to this
level because that also gives you brain
defects you have to try to recover this
this particular pattern that's very
complicated but the model was was uh was
was amazing in that it told us that
there's one particular Channel called
hcn2 that would actually do this it
would leave these cells down low it
would raise these cells up high and and
would it would predict that it would
recover this amazingly enough um and I'm
always shocked when when when these
models actually give you something that
that that works to to fix these very
complex defects it actually works
whether you introduce new hcn2 channels
or you use drugs to open existing hcn2
channels here here's a normal brain
here's a defective brain in this case
it's even worse than a teratogen these
animals have been um have been uh a
mutant form of a of a notch protein has
been introduced Notch is a very uh
important neurogenesis Gene and without
that the forbrain is gone the midbrain
and hindbrain are a bubble these animals
have no Behavior they just lay there
doing nothing it's a it's a really
strong defect despite the notch mutation
look the the the structure of the brain
is back and in fact their IQs come back
so they
um they uh they their learning rates you
you can test test their learning rates
and so on uh in in behavioral assays the
learning rates are indistinguishable
from normal so you can rescue even even
not only from teratogens but actually
from really nasty genetic defects if you
manage the bi electrical pattern
correctly and the way so this is
important this this was not a screen we
didn't try 100 different or a thousand
different drugs the model told us very
specifically which channel we would have
to open to get the right bioelectrical
pattern so we've moved you know when I
started this work in 99 or so uh 1999 uh
we were at the point of doing screens
just asking what are what are bi
electrical States for what do they do
and now we're to the point where in
certain cases we can make a model that
specifically suggests Therapeutics it
tells you which channel drug to use to
fix a very complex defect and so the the
the the vision I see going forward for
for biom medicine looks something like
this um there's a there's a uh a
simulator that uh takes as input
expression data which already exist from
from RNA SE studies of what channels are
present in what cells those are your
control knobs those are the things you
get to to tweak and of course what
bioelectric pattern is desired for your
tissue now this this is largely missing
this this needs to be acquired these uh
um physiological data sets need to be
acquired for for most in most cases once
you have those two pieces of information
you can ask the model what channel and
pump would I need to open and close to
uh to to get the right pattern and then
uh you can simply look for existing
channels something like 20% of all human
drugs are human used drugs are are ION
channel drugs and then you can simply
look look for either develop new ones or
look for them and so this is again we've
already um you can go you can go play
with this a little bit we've already
started on the basic framework here
where uh it's called the electrocutica
design environment where you would sit
down you would pick the cells and
tissues that you want you would say my
pattern is wrong what do I do and this
thing would actually then tell you to uh
tell you which drugs you actually need
to use okay so that's the that's kind of
the vision and all all of this part is
the machine learning part because it uh
uh interrogating those models is is is
not is not easy you can't do it just in
your head you have to do the simulation
and you have to be able to work the
simulation backwards through a sech of
some sort to know what the intervention
should be so um just to close here uh
here here are my conclusions that um
there's a very important uh
physiological layer of software that
sits between the genotype and the
anatomy and it's a really uh tractable
Target for new biomedicine evolution
discovered very early on that electrical
signaling is a great way to process
information to integrate decisions
across distance uh so so the fact that
we have organs and tissues that scale
correctly and that connect up to each
other other is is a consequence of that
fact um we now have the ability to read
and write some of these pattern memories
and uh to thus to reprogram large scale
shape heads eyes appendages not by
micromanaging not by controlling stem
cell uh properties but by telling the
collective what it is that it's supposed
to be building right taking advantage of
the fact that it is a homeostatic system
and that uh new machine learning tools
are coming online as a kind of robot
scientist platform to help humans
scientists infer uh bioelectric and and
biochemical circuits from functional
data and then to infer interventions
right so so how do we manipulate those
circuits to give us the outcome that we
want and um I think two things will come
from all this not only um fantastic um
regenerative medicine approaches uh that
that will do way more than I think is
actually doable with classical let's say
crisper and things like that but uh will
also actually feed backwards and help us
design new AI platforms that are not
based on brain architecture but on much
more ancient principles of of
computation and and and scaling of uh of
of cognition in early cells so that's it
um I want to thank the uh the students
and the postto who uh who did all this
uh who did all this work um thank our
funders thank the model systems who
actually do all the all the heavy
lifting for all of this research and um
again a disclosure this this there's a
company called morphos euticals zinc
that David and I are part of um yeah and
I thank you for your time and I'll take
question
questions
hello uh thank you Dr 11 for that talk I
know a lot of our attendees signed up
for our Symposium just to hear it and
I'm certain that it lived up to their
expectations it was truly revolutionary
and I had no idea that was there was
such a complex bioelectrical l that
controlled our physiological outcomes
now we will have a 10-minute question
period so if anyone in person has
questions I will ask them to please line
up here uh at the podium and any online
attendees as before may put their
questions in the chat and one of our
execs will relay them to Dr Len
here
the microphone please uh hello
doctor how you do sorry I was just
curious that when you mentioned that
about inducing bioelectric signals with
ions to make changes is more or like is
additional energy required from Ela to
fuel to to like fuel the changes in
development like say addition nutrients
and minerals as they're like an order of
complexity to it yeah interesting
interesting question um I I don't think
so uh now nobody's measured this so it's
possible that there are subtle
differences but I don't think there are
major differences because what you're
doing is you're not you're not
necessarily introducing new proteins
you're not uh doing anything other than
opening and closing the existing uh the
existing channels that are there um and
so I you know I I think well what it
does require is a baseline level of
resting potential which is kept up
usually by the sodium pottassium atpa so
that has to kept be kept going but I
think I think uh not much energy is
actually used to open and close these
channels so um as far as I know I don't
think there's an energy limitation
here
should any nobody's talking I can't hear
anyone I think you guys are
muted oh there we
go just just press that because it's
just on at this
time
no okay can
I okay um Professor leine thank you so
much for the talk it was really
fascinating thank you um so I don't have
much of a biomedical background so all
of this looks like magic to me much of
it uh but I do have computer science
background and I'm trying to figure
out how AI could help in this endeavor
and uh so from what I understand uh the
models that you're speaking of
involve could involve like looking at a
bunch of data that you collected from
all of these different animals and
then finding out some patterns which can
then extrapolate to new kinds of data
make new predictions that sort of thing
so is that is that the kind of models
that you're implying or do you have
something else in mind could you maybe
say yeah so uh there's been there's been
a couple of different types of uh of of
uses of AI here and then and then we can
talk about what's still missing the
thing that we did in planaria was to
basically build a database basically
build an expert system that knows every
published result in plaria research so
every experiment M of the form I did
this and then I saw that I did this and
then I saw that right so these you know
experimental setup result right so those
P you know those kind of pairs um we
have hundreds I think like 800 maybe in
the in the database so that is a
knowledge database uh that's everything
we know about planarian and then what
the machine learning has to do is uh
using a s using a simulator so a virtual
planarian it has to try to come up with
a a model of the regulatory circuit
within each cell such that when you pull
them together into a tissue and you
start doing virtual experiments on them
give the same answers as what's in the
database right most models of course
don't match that don't match that and so
this was an evolutionary algorithm that
eventually found a model that acts
exactly like all not not only did it act
like the experiments in the database of
course we held back a bunch of
experiments that it never got to see and
then it correctly predicted those
experiments and then it actually gave us
some that had never been done before
that we did and we saw the the right
outcome so so so one thing you want to
do with with with machine learning is to
in infer models of what's going on not
just predict numbers and and you know
and um uh and and that kind of thing but
actually infer human understandable
descriptions of what the algorithm is
that it's operating inside the cells and
also across the whole tissues that's one
that's one kind of thing another another
thing sounds more like what I think you
were describing which is that if if we
had a large number of bioelectric
measurements across different organs
different ages different types of
animals then then you could ask the
system to try to infer patterns in that
in that uh in that data and try to help
us guess the bi Electric Code that would
be uh super cool and I think we should
do that the problem is that uh typically
machine learning requires large numbers
of data these experiments are very
difficult to do they're very uh timec
consuming we do not have anything like
the volume of data that's required for
typical approaches in this field so I
think until the technology C up that
kind of thing is going to be uh is going
to be pretty pretty hard um but
nevertheless uh what we what we have
also done is uh apply apply machine
learning to uh to to models of the code
that we do have for example the brain
this is how we discovered the
intervention that fixes the brain and uh
and ask ask the the the machine learning
to pick interventions given an existing
model so uh you know we still lots of
technology to be developed but I think
already we can see how how it's going to
be
used okay now we will take a question
from the online chat it says what slow
does The evolutionary process work for
the cells to know the correct
bioelectric patterning to produce the
ultimate Anatomy yeah yeah great
question I mean where do the where does
the pre- pattern come from in the first
place so um we we've tracked this down
the best the best example we have of
this is in the the early U is in the of
of of left right patterning in the Frog
embryo because we can track it all the
way down to the Single Cell the
fertilized egg and and so so we have all
that information from the from the
beginning the best way to explain that
is uh I'll tell you I'll tell you the
physics side of it and then I'll tell
you what I think is the kind of
computational side of it the physics
side has to do with uh symmetry breaking
and self-organization basically much
like touring patterns where you can have
very specific kinds of patterns appear
in a WellMed
medium if you have uh ion channels
expressed across a sheet of cells and
they're all identical so no patterning
has taken place yet there's no pattern
everybody's the same pretty soon you're
going to have very characteristic
patterns you know and the touring
patterns would be St spots and stripes
and bi electrics it's slightly different
but but pretty soon you're going to have
patterns spontaneously arising and what
determines the shape of those patterns
are uh fundamentally the property two
two things the properties of the ion
channels and the laws of physics that's
that's what determines the shape of the
patterns that spontaneously arise in
tissue and so what evolution does is
optimally uh tweak the properties of the
of the electrical of the ion channels
and of specific signals that get kicked
off at different time points by by
various cells that uh optimally shape
those patterns such that they end up
provi producing a useful um producing a
useful organism okay so so that's kind
of the physics end of it you can see
that in its you know kind of using
conventional uh Concepts uh there's
there's another way to think about this
which is you know my students often well
when they first get introduced to this
they'll say but where is the pattern
recorded like I see the electric face
where was that pattern recorded and I
have to remind them that patterns don't
have to be recorded so for example I can
take um I can take a couple of
transistors and I can make an and gate
and it's it's it's a piece of physics
but it also does logic and it has a very
nice truth table associated with that or
maybe I build a calculator and it can do
signs and cosiness and then you can ask
the question where is that truth table
encoded right how does it know how to do
that and again we have to come back to
the fact that all of these things take
advantage of the laws of physics and
computation if you if you produce a
specific kind of physical machine it's
going to have behaviors this is the
software part it's going to have
behaviors that are not necessarily
directly encoded uh anywhere by anybody
it's a it's interest various interes
laws of physics working through this
machine and so that's the other way to
think about this much like with with
computers you end up with all kinds of
calculation you know interesting uh
calculations and computations that don't
have to be explicitly pre sort of
provided in the genome or anywhere else
it's not where they are they're they're
like kind of like the the properties of
mathematics so um yeah so those are the
those are the two uh two ways of
thinking about
it uh thank you Dr Lan we still have
many people lined up for questions but
we want to be respectful of your time if
you have five more minutes we could take
maybe two more questions and then we'll
finish sure let's do two more questions
and anybody that I don't get to hear
feel free to drop me an email and uh
later you know I'll get back to you
offline okay thank you very
much another plenaria related question
here
um so you mentioned that when you cut
the original head off that another um it
could potentially grow the head of
another species um would that mean that
the head part would be genetically
different from the body part no no the
genetics are are completely intact what
it tells you is that the genetics don't
determine don't uh determine the shape
of the head and and and we already know
that right we shouldn't be you know
anybody who uses computers should not be
so
um really shocked that the same piece of
Hardware can do multiple different
things so there's a default right so any
kind of like think about a um a
programmable calculator you turn it on
and by default very reliably the first
thing you see is zero that circuit on
the on a little LCD screen so that
circuit has an electrical state that it
reliably starts off in but it's a
programmable calculator which means that
you can now give it stimuli or inputs
that alter the way that the pieces talk
to each other internally and then you
can cause it to remember various things
and to do things that it wasn't doing
when you first turned it on same thing
here the genetics produce cells that by
default reliably end up making
triangular heads in that particular
species but the cool thing about that
Hardware is that's not the only thing it
knows how to do that's just what it
typically does you can by by by
judicious interventions you can you can
uh basically uh push it into different
regions of the state space of the
electrical circuit that that genome
knows how to make so it it it's it's all
of this stuff is forcing us to rethink
what what we what is the relationship
between the genome and the anatomy you
know this idea that the genome somehow
codes for the anatomy is that you know
that's just not the right way to think
about it the genome codes for a machine
that by default knows how to make that
anatomy And by the way if you want to
see a really um uh kind
of egregious example of this kind of
thing I can go go to my website and
under the presentations there's a bunch
of talks about xenobots and we show that
cells with skin cells with a perfectly
normal frog genome can build a whole
other type of creature it's it's kind of
a synthetic Proto organism has different
behaviors and different shapes and does
all kinds of things it's the exact same
genome so so we got to be just keep that
in mind that the genome is does not
directly set the shape at
all thank
you all right I had I had a question
about the methods you're using to to uh
change the electrical patterns why are
you not using electrical fields and are
you solely using drugs or genetic
manipulations of changing how much ion
channels are
expressed uh right we use we use drugs
we use ion channels modifications and we
use optogenetics so light so so why are
we not using electrical Fields um for
the following reason there's nothing
fundamentally wrong with electrical
fields in fact back in the day starting
in I think the earliest experiment was
like 190 three when people didn't have
these other Technologies they that's
what they used they used electrical
Fields the problem is that uh electrodes
and applied electrical fields are really
good at two things they're good at
spiking excitable cells so if you want
to Trigger action potentials that
neuroscientists do all the time they're
great at that so you can you know put a
put in a like kilohertz um kind of a
thing and and and Spike spike neurons
that's fine uh and they're good for
providing vectors for cell migration so
if I put if I put two electrodes across
a piece of tissue here um the cells will
feel the electric field most cells love
to crawl in electrical Fields they're
just going to start crawling okay though
that you can do but but notice what we
have here what we have what what's
important here are the stable steady
state long-term distributions in resting
potential that means I need cells over
so in the electric face I need cells
over here that are minus 30 and they
need to sit that way for hours I need
cells over here that are minus 80 and
then some more minus 30 and then some
minus 20 so this complicated pattern of
wrting potentials that you you can't set
that up with electrodes if I put
electrodes on either side of a of a of a
cell what happens is this side of the
cell gets depolarized that side of the
cell gets hyperpolarized the net voltage
of the cell does not change at all I
there's there's no way that I know of to
use electrodes to set up a stable steady
long-term uh complex image or you know a
pattern of electrical potential it's
just not it's just not not doable for
now maybe someday somebody will will
invent the way to do it but but for now
it can't be done that
way uh okay thank you Dr 11 uh so lastly
for anyone whose questions are still
remaining could I ask you to put your
email in the chat so that people can see
it yes absolutely uh yeah great
questions thank you so much um thank you
for the opportunity to share these ideas
that is my email address please feel
free to drop me an email and we'll chat
thank you very
much byebye everybody thank
you thank you so
much